[WHOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>GRACE LIU: SIBO stands for
a small intestinal bacteria
overgrowth.
The root problem
is these pathogens
that are stealing the energy
and driving the fire down.
Bloating, burps, gas,
heartburn, reflux.
>>REGINA MEREDITH: Yep.
>>LIU: When people feel healthy
and they have lots of fiber,
they don't crave things.
Their neurotransmitters
are back.
Adrenaline is more normal.
Cortisol is more normal.
They're fertile again.
It's like, oh, my gosh.
I'm sitting in the car.
I'm not depressed anymore,
and I don't crave sugar.
So the disruptions come from--
>>REGINA: I don't think
we have to deliberate
too hard to realize when there's
something off in our guts.
We're bloated, mentally slow,
inflamed, and so much more.
There's a plethora of diets
and books that show us the way.
But when the way doesn't work,
we're even more discouraged
and then give up.
According to Dr.
Grace Liu, there
are actually some basic tenants
that determine our health
from the gut set.
So we do have to pay
attention to the guts.
>>LIU: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: And it is.
I've given up many times.
[LAUGHTER]
I'm one of those people.
Try it for a week, I give up.
So thank you for joining us.
This is a really big topic.
So many people have
messed up guts now.
It is really almost--
it's almost epidemic.
Because now even kids are
having food sensitivities
and their own kind of
brain fog and issues.
When I was a kid and running
around, no one got sick.
No one had allergies.
It was just very rare,
but it's changed.
The world has changed.
So you wrote the book,
"7 Steps to Heal SIBO."
So we're going to
start with SIBO.
>>LIU: Yes.
>>REGINA: So first of all,
I think, why don't you
tell us what SIBO is and why
we're starting at this point?
>>LIU: Exactly.
Thank you so much
for having me on.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
>>LIU: It's such an honor.
So SIBO stands for a small
intestinal bacteria overgrowth.
And I actually teach
clinicians and coaches
how to assess the
gut microbiome,
because it's so huge.
It's a 100 trillion
microorganisms
living within our terrain,
let's say, our landscape.
And including our GI tract,
the biggest place, the gut.
And SIBO is interesting.
We can do various testing,
gastroenterology tests.
But they're all proxies, like
breath tests or stool testing.
But none really show us
really what's going on.
And there are more
advanced tests now,
that we can actually
genetically look
at the microbes sitting there.
And small intestines is funny.
It's higher up in our gut.
It's not near our stools.
It's not where our
stools are produced.
They're produced in the
colon, the large intestine.
It's not the small
intestines, and--
>>REGINA: And so
many people have
upset in the upper
digestive tract, which
is the small intestine.
>>LIU: Right.
Bloating, burps, gas, heartburn,
reflux, a little nausea
and a little vomiting.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LIU: Even like asthma.
Even a postnasal drip.
It actually ascends
up to a higher level.
So we actually do a metabolomic
test, organic acid test.
Several companies offer it.
We love one from Great Plains.
They're really awesome.
We use them all, but that
one's pretty tremendous.
>>REGINA: Well, tell
me about that test
first, because it's
something most people
haven't heard about.
>>LIU: Yeah.
So just like-- what kind of
car do you drive, Regina?
>>REGINA: A Tesla.
>>LIU: OK.
So you have a dashboard, right?
You can tell where
your mechanic--
>>REGINA: No dashboard.
Just a computer screen,
but close enough.
>>LIU: Yeah, close enough.
>>REGINA: [LAUGHS]
>>LIU: So if lights
go off, you could tell
your Tesla mechanic, oh, hey.
I need help.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LIU: You wouldn't take
it to a Honda mechanic.
You wouldn't take it
to a Hyundai mechanic.
They wouldn't really
know what to do.
What the heck, right?
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
>>LIU: And if they
try to work on it,
if they're not trained with
the electrical and ga--
they could probably potentially
mess up your beautiful Tesla.
So I kind of am the same.
We do certain testing because
some testing won't actually
tell us what's going on.
We're blind to really
what's going on.
So the metabolomic test
means the metabolites
from our GI tract,
microbes that live
there, go into our bloodstream.
Then they're refined.
They go through our kidney
and they're filtered,
and then we could pick
them up in the urine.
And urine is really an
awesome medium to collect.
Not that stool isn't.
Stool is only the last meter
and a half of our GI tract.
The colon, the large intestine,
is only the last meter half,
so we're missing a lot
of information upstream.
So it's like a dashboard.
But let's say you're trying to
see how much gas you have left
but someone's looking at the
windshield wiper indicator.
Well, you're going to miss
a whole lot of information,
if not everything.
And it's like a-- it's
our gut portfolio,
like small intestines is
like a wealth portfolio.
>>REGINA: Explain the
metabolomic part to us.
Yeah, that's what we're
not familiar with.
>>LIU: Absolutely.
So metabolomic measures in
our urine all the different,
potentially
different, metabolites
coming from the organisms
that live anywhere
in our body, any
part of our terrain.
So it could be for women,
vagina area, our gut area,
even our ear, nose, throat if
we have tremendous overgrowths
there.
They'll show up on this
test, so it's fabulous.
>>REGINA: And so that's
done through urine?
>>LIU: Urine testing, yes.
>>REGINA: Urine testing.
>>LIU: Yeah.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>LIU: Because we're
looking at the output.
Someday, it'll be so advanced,
Regina, we'll do a breath test,
like on "Star Trek."
Whoo!
And we'll know exactly
what's living in the body,
because they make volatile acids
and volatile materials that can
be detected with just the air.
>>REGINA: So because
people are paying--
they're paying attention
and taking notes here.
So what is the name
of that urine test?
>>LIU: We love the
organic acid test.
We call it an OAT,
There are a lot of
companies that are awesome.
And the one we love
is Great Plains Labs.
>>REGINA: OK.
And did you have to have
a prescription or can
anybody order that?
>>LIU: They can.
We can order it from our
website, thegutinstitute.com,
or from their naturopathic
or health coach.
>>REGINA: And so this is going
to give you what information?
And then what you do
with that information?
>>LIU: It gives us a dashboard
of the organisms that
live there.
So it focuses on two kingdoms
of life that live in the gut.
We actually have
many, five or six.
Archaea viruses,
fungi, bacteria,
eukaryotes like parasites.
But these only focus on
two kingdoms, so bacterial
and fungal.
And it's amazing.
There's over 12
markers for fungal.
No other test does that.
That's why we love it a lot.
And then it's got nine
markers for bacterial.
And so when we see SIBO,
small intestinal bacterial
overgrowth, what I have observed
seeing thousands of these tests
and on our concierge
clients, everyone also
has a condition known as
SIFO, small intestinal fungal
overgrowth.
>>REGINA: Yes.
I was going to ask
you about that next.
So please, share.
>>LIU: You're so advanced
and sophisticated.
Exactly.
So our gut, if we're losing
our firewall, our protection
and our allies, we're
vulnerable for all kinds
of microbial invasion.
Parasites, viruses,
fungal, mold.
Not just bacteria.
So this test is
hugely illuminating,
because all of it's present
when the firewalls are gone.
And what we do at
my Gut Institute,
we reinstall the
firewalls for people.
People get their body temps up.
They feel happy and their
moods are sustained again.
Their neurotransmitters
are back.
Adrenaline is more normal.
Cortisol is more normal.
All the hormones--
they're fertile again.
So literally, we see so many
changes and improvements--
>>REGINA: SIBO is
knocking out all of that?
>>LIU: SIBO can.
SIBO puts out a
lot of metabolites
that are carcinogenic.
They're proinflammatory.
They make us fat, brain
fogged, and fatigued.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
>>LIU: And that's
hard to recover.
It's like a house
full of asbestos,
and you can't just rip
it all out overnight.
It may take time in stages.
You don't want to leave
your pets or kids in there.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LIU: You've got to protect
them all or take them out,
right?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LIU: And all the
staff that go in
have to wear protective gear.
So the same thing with the gut.
We get a couple of nasties in
there, but they're not hard.
We can gently remo--
gently have botanicals
to help them come out.
And then our key is to bring
back in the probiotics.
These are our true allies.
So I actually
formulate probiotics.
That's a disclaimer.
Because I love them so much.
These are allies and friends.
>>REGINA: I do, too.
>>LIU: Yeah, and we
need to transplant them.
They're like an organ.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LIU: Yeah, they're like a
bank account for us, even.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LIU: And they help
us digest gluten.
>>REGINA: But there's so
many different strains.
>>LIU: True.
>>REGINA: And then people have
to figure out, oh, my gosh.
I don't know what to do.
I don't know which
strain to take.
The education curve
is there on trying
to figure out the match for
your body and your probiotic.
Maybe you can educate us a
little bit on that right now.
>>LIU: Absolutely.
I'm a fan of all probiotics, so
I'm pretty nonbiased about it,
agnostic.
They're all good.
>>REGINA: But are there are
certain symptoms in people
that need a certain strain?
More the bacillus
strain versus--
>>LIU: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>LIU: Yes.
>>REGINA: So let's
talk about that.
>>LIU: OK.
So just like every car has a
steering wheel and four wheels,
if they're missing them, they're
not going to get too far.
They're not going to, for
sure, drive down the street.
They for sure won't
finish an F1 race, right?
So what we help them to do is
bring back the right steering
wheel and bring
back the right make
and model of the other wheels.
Some clients come to us and
they've got only one wheel on,
some three.
So we've got to bring
back the wheels on.
So what we do is we profile
the gut a little bit
from the urine organic
metabolomic test, we--
>>REGINA: So that's kind of
where you start with the--
>>LIU: We can see what
the overgrowths are, yeah.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>LIU: And because humans have
a set amount of keystone--
we call them keystone species.
Many of these come in
probiotics, by the way.
They track us at birth
all the way till we're
centenary, over 100 years old.
Or Methuselah, 120.
We have tons of data now,
metabolomic as well as
metagenomics.
We know the species that
belong in healthy guts,
healthy microbiomes.
These are the wealth accounts
of human beings, Homo sapiens.
We know what belongs there.
And what we do is we
help bring them back.
And we anchor them with fiber.
We call that a fancy
name called prebiotics.
So we need probiotics and
then we need their fuel.
The super fuel is really
fantastic fiber for them.
Like psyllium, inulin, flaxseed.
I love some commercial--
we have extracts now.
They're creamy
and sweet tasting,
but they don't have calories.
But like GOS, which
is found in dairy.
I don't eat dairy much, but
we can find it in dairy.
But XOS and many
other ones, FOS.
And they come in more like
roots and fruits and greens.
And this ROS even comes from--
raffinose oligosaccharide
comes from lentils and beans.
>>REGINA: So the prebiotics are
foods that have fiber in them?
>>LIU: Yes.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>LIU: And our species
might have eaten as much
as, Paleolithic studies seem
to show, even 100 to 120 grams
of fiber a day.
Right now, we're at
barely 5 to 10 grams a day
for most people in the modern,
sad, sad standard American
diet.
And that's a--
>>REGINA: Yeah, which is sad.
>>LIU: --probably a reason why
we miss our protective allies.
They need to be fed or
they starve, they go away.
>>REGINA: Right.
And so you start with the test.
And then once you
kind of have an idea
of what spectrum of fungus
and bacteria are in there--
>>LIU: Yes.
>>REGINA: --then you start
on the reduction of them,
or do you just start
with prebiotics?
>>LIU: So I like to
layer protocols together.
We see the most rapid
recovery for people.
We have tons of people able
to say, oh, my God, Grace.
In two months, I can
eat gluten again.
Or, oh, I feel myself
again, for women
who are trying to get fertile.
We see their progesterone
go up three or four times.
I also do supplement
programs for MMA fighters.
And usually in just two
to three weeks or less,
they have endless
energy and endurance.
Whereas before, they have these
little lapses or hit a wall.
So there's a
researcher in Australia
who did a fascinating study how
our hormones and our fertility
and our fecundity and
vigor is really to our gut,
actually, and the microbiome.
So he did an amazing study.
He took really healthy young
men, 18 to 40 years old,
gave them a small dose
of pathogenics bacteria,
but only their cell wall.
And it is inflammatory a bit.
So he gave them a dose,
0.8 nanograms per kilo.
Within six hours, he saw
their testosterone tank.
And they were, of course,
really healthy men.
And so it came back up again.
So when I work with
men or women, when we--
>>REGINA: Tell us
the implication,
what that test was, what it was
showing, what it was proving,
and-- yeah, so we
can understand it.
>>LIU: Yeah.
A lot of our vigor and
energy and endurance
comes from who we are
and our hormone profile.
So we do a lot of profiling.
We do hormone testing.
We do gut testing.
We do a variety of
different testing,
because we will see things get
better, even 3x better or even
5x better.
So when I work with different
athletes or executives or moms,
really smart moms, we want
to help them feel better.
More themselves, what they were
when they were 17 or 27 or 37.
Whatever they want, right?
We want to restore
that, and we can
when we restore our allies again
by healing and sealing the gut
lining, balancing those
pathogenic flora so
that we have the firewall, the
firewall of the probiotics.
>>REGINA: So essentially
healing leaky gut first.
>>LIU: Yeah, but there's
a host of other things
that can be occurring too.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>LIU: Exactly.
>>REGINA: All right.
So then do we begin
looking at-- first of all,
let's talk about some of
the offending things that
are causing the
problem to begin with.
I think that's a
good place to start.
We've got an idea now
of what the test is.
We can look at it.
Then we have to start looking
at how we're going to approach
this thing strategically, OK?
So let's say you have
essentially the symptoms
of SIBO, and your labs are kind
of pointing towards that as
well.
>>LIU: Yes.
>>REGINA: So what's
the first thing we do?
>>LIU: OK.
So if someone has either
silent SIBO, where
they have no symptoms except
maybe fatigue or brain fog
or slow mental clarity
or an obvious one,
where it's autoimmune disease or
cancer risks or cancer or aches
and pains, fibromyalgia, we
one of the first things, tests,
I do is to look at
their organic acid test.
And then eventually, we'll
look at a stool test.
We want to see what's
remaining after we
do some initial weeding.
I call it weeding.
Or it's like staging a house.
We're doing some initial
cleanup, housekeeping.
We also look at hormones.
We want to see how low
someone's adrenal and cortisol
dysregulation is.
Because the flora, when
they're pathogenic,
they wear everything down.
The reserves go down.
So we look at where they
start, because we're
going to help them boost it
where they need boosting.
And they feel more
energy and endurance just
within two to four weeks
or less by doing so.
So some people have three to
five levels of, we call it,
adrenal insufficiency.
So one of our primary glands,
it literally motors and--
it's the engine for our energy.
And we have-- we can
restore function there
if it's kind of
poopy, not so great.
I look at centenarian
studies and men and women who
are really healthy, chronic
disease-free, cancer-free,
living 80, 90, 100 years, they
have robust adrenal glands.
So we can restore a lot.
So some of the
testing we'll do is
like to ask them, oh, do
you feel wired but tired?
Do you wake up refreshed?
Are you able to work out?
Do you feel tired all the time?
Just basic questions like that.
So then depending on where they
score and some other testing we
might do to look at
coritsol dysregulation
and their adrenaline,
then we give them
different levels of support.
That's really key, because
we check core temperatures.
A lot of clients who come
in, they're really ill.
They've got the SIBO and
the SIFO and they're tired.
Their core temperatures may
only be 95.0, believe it or not,
Fahrenheit, or 97.0.
It's not appropriate.
This is our primary--
our thermostat and the
temperatures we sustain
are our primary way
we fry the microbes
and prevent fungal
overgrowth, viral overgrowth,
or bacterial overgrowth.
So when we lose that.
So when we lose our friends, our
allies, and we lose our fire,
we're going to look at diseases.
So we have to restore
both, actually.
So some of our protocols
are restoring all that
simultaneously.
>>REGINA: I have a question.
This came up during COVID.
People were having their
temperature taken everywhere
they went.
They have that little
gun and their forehead.
I'd have them do my
wrist, if possible.
>>LIU: Yeah.
>>REGINA: But
nonetheless, doing that.
But the numbers that they put
up as the acceptable spectrum
were considerably
lower than you think
of as the average
human temperature.
Has there been a drop en
masse in our core temperature
in humanity?
That's what it looks like.
>>LIU: Regina, you are just
so sophisticated and advanced.
Yes, there has been few reports
about it, but it's super legit.
And I see it across the board
with all my clients as well,
too.
>>REGINA: That's why I'm
asking, because this thing
you're talking about,
this constant fatigue,
trying to jack ourselves up
with, whether it's caffeine--
>>LIU: Caffeine.
[LAUGHS]
>>REGINA: --or
something stronger.
>>LIU: Yeah.
>>REGINA: What is that a
little tiny can, Red Bull?
>>LIU: Yes.
[LAUGHTER]
>>REGINA: Or
something like that.
>>LIU: Exactly.
>>REGINA: Trying to
jack ourselves back up.
But this lack of fire which
you're seeing as people
become more and more
kind of static or--
>>LIU: Anyone on the
standard American diet
or that Western civilization.
>>REGINA: Yeah, and
more time in the chair.
Tell us.
Let's talk about
this for a moment
since this core temperature
is so important.
Why is our temperature lowering?
>>LIU: I think it's
the same disruptions
that we want to change, right?
Like you're finding for
your audience to bring note,
but people may be
on high sugar diets,
low fiber diets, not feeding
their flora well, antibiotics.
>>REGINA: Aha.
>>LIU: Yeah.
We didn't know they were so bad.
They saved lives, prevented
death from pneumonia, and--
>>REGINA: But no one
knew what they were
going to do to our gut health.
>>LIU: No one knew
the damage, yeah.
And our collateral
damage is our gut health.
Like if something happened and
all Teslas lost their steering
wheel in three cars, you'd
think it's a travesty.
But no one's
screaming, like, hey.
Silent SIFO and
SIBO is a problem.
People living with body
aches and horrible pain
and depression.
It's not great.
That's silent SIFO
and silent SIBO.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LIU: And we can reverse that.
So the disruptions come from
antibiotics, high sugar diets,
stress.
How many of us are--
if you're an introvert,
maybe you're OK.
But if you're an
extrovert, being isolated
is very damaging.
>>REGINA: The COVID this has
been very, very challenging
for extroverts.
>>LIU: It's literally causing
depression and suicides
all across the board.
>>REGINA: I read a recent report
in the US population 18 to 25,
1/4 in this report have
seriously considered suicide.
One in four.
>>LIU: Yeah.
My kids are social.
They're in that age group.
Yeah, we worry about them.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: So stress.
>>LIU: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
stress is a big one.
>>LIU: Any kind of stress,
like too much light stress,
not getting UV light.
Some people aren't going
outdoors in the sunlight.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LIU: Please go out
and get some sunlight.
>>REGINA: Yes, get some sun.
>>LIU: Your microbes
and your flora love it.
Yeah.
See friends.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LIU: See really happy faces.
>>REGINA: Really important.
>>LIU: Yeah.
Eating together,
breaking bread together,
sharing in our communities.
This is a huge disruption
to Homo sapiens.
We're wolf pack type,
and we live among tribes.
It's wildly abnormal.
>>REGINA: So all
of this combined
is literally kind of turning
the flame down at our core.
>>LIU: I believe
so, and our flora
are kind of being
sacrificed in the end.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
>>LIU: It's almost like
an antibiotic effect.
>>REGINA: Right.
OK, so that's what we
shouldn't be doing so--
>>LIU: Yeah.
Also extreme exercise.
I work with athletes.
Endurance athleticism
is highly shown,
right after a heavy, heavy,
heavy event or workout,
their flora goes down.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LIU: And they're more
prone to infections.
>>REGINA: Absolutely
>>LIU: And there's
a lot of studies,
not-- they're not
all great studies,
but if you have a high enough
dose and the right probiotic,
you can protect from
pneumonia or upper respiratory
or other type of infections
after an endurance event,
that they're highly
performance-altering
components.
Probiotics are great,
but you're right.
You have to have the right
dose, the right species.
There's certain
species we don't do.
For instance, we
don't do any Espalier.
It's very popular and
functional medicine land.
It's not great.
Everyone has
reactions to it if you
measure at a sublevel
with appropriate testing.
We check antibodies
against saccharomyces.
Usually people
are lit up for it,
so you don't want to give
something-- just like gluten.
Like if someone's
allergic for gluten,
they show antibodies
to gliadin and gluten.
We're not going to give
them gluten all day.
Espalier is not
a great probiotic
for our dysbiotic clients.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>LIU: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Now, what
about supplementation?
>>LIU: It's a yeast,
saccharomyces.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>LIU: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yes.
What about supplementation if
you're looking at SIBO or SIFO
in the upper GI tract?
>>LIU: Yes.
So there are a
variety of supplements
that are shown to help this.
We are fans of all
of them, actually.
So sometimes, even probiotics
can have adverse effects.
You have to start low, go slow.
Find the right ones and test.
Test, don't guess.
Second, we love all kinds
of anti-inflammatories.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
>>LIU: Yeah.
So one of my favorite
is called Metagenics.
It's called SPM, specialized
pro-resolving mediators.
When we look at studies,
people who are stressed
or they're not
meditating, they're
not in a vagal tone, a
parasympathetic strong nervous
system drive, studies show they
have low levels of resolvins
in their tissues.
In Japan, studies show that
when they IV resolvins,
they can put cancer
into remission.
It's super fantastic.
>>REGINA: Interesting,
though, is
this is resolvins
you're speaking of.
But that's SPM?
>>LIU: SPM.
It's a powerful
anti-inflammatory,
and there are at least four
or five colitis studies.
So human gut inflammatory
conditions, disorders, they're
highly improved using resolvins.
And it helps with chronic pain.
So if some of our clients
come, they have some aches,
we help to reduce that pain
that may be stealing away
their drive.
So we can get their adrenals
back on track faster.
>>REGINA: So is that only taken
on like an as-needed basis?
Or is it something people
would take on a regular basis?
>>LIU: Well, for us in our
protocols, we do it regularly.
It's part of our
leaky gut protocol.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
>>LIU: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LIU: Yeah, and there's
amazing other things we do.
And then the key is to
get to the root problem.
The root problem
is these pathogens
that are stealing the energy
and driving the fire down.
And then the second
root problem is,
everyone has some degree
of adrenal insufficiency.
And I would say
even more so now,
because we live
in the COVID era.
It's probably not likely to
end in the next three to five
years, so this is going to
be going out for a while.
So seeing what we can do, we
have some special exercises.
I'm a big fan of oxytocin.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LIU: It's a neurotransmitter
and a signaler.
It's healing.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
>>LIU: We give-- they say a kiss
for a boo-boo is more healing
than a Band-Aid or--
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>LIU: Yeah, or like antibiotic
cream for little children,
because a mom's kiss it
elicits so much oxytocin.
When we see faces,
our oxytocin goes up.
When we see humans
interacting with trust,
that drives our oxytocin.
So also, running
and sex increase it.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>LIU: And guess what?
Probiotics are shown
to improve it, too.
>>REGINA: Really?
>>LIU: Yes.
They help with wound
healing and it's
associated with a statistical
increase in oxytocin.
For autistic kids, we'll
have them do nasal sometimes,
and it's shown to help
increase eye gazing and eye
contact and a lot of the
other neuroatypical signs.
>>REGINA: OK.
You just said nasal, and
you're talking about nasal--
>>LIU: It's a squirter.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: Nasal probiotics.
>>LIU: It's an
oxytocin nasal spray.
>>REGINA: Oh, oxytocin.
>>LIU: It doesn't
work for everybody.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LIU: But we do
exercises to elicit it.
So one is we have them
exercise 10,000 steps a day,
if possible, unless they
have chronic fatigue.
We have them, with
their partner,
do mutual 20-minute
massage with each other.
And even if possible, some
people's love language
is verbal, so we ask
them to give each other
some affirmations.
Like, oh, I love
you because xyz.
You're so wonderful and make
me coffee every morning.
Or oh, I love how I feel seen
and safe and heard by you,
and it just makes
me feel so good.
So while they're doing
the mutual massage.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LIU: And we have seen
huge healing for the gut,
because love is the best
magic on Earth, right?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LIU: And love is our
building block of our universe.
>>REGINA: And when we look
at the quality of information
that's moving through our
atmosphere all the time
and we're being exposed
to all the time,
it's really the antithesis
of love for the most part.
>>LIU: Yeah, exactly.
>>REGINA: And I've been
thinking about that recently.
I'll do another
show with someone
that does this subject of 5G.
But I thought, it's not
just the frequencies,
but the information and data
load and the low quality
of information and data that's
being projected and passed
through these frequencies.
I think the low consciousness
of it has much to do with it.
>>LIU: There are
changes to DNA, yeah.
>>REGINA: If you had super high
frequency information being
projected, constantly broadcast
through these EMF fields,
I think we'd be seeing
a very different thing.
Because it's unconscious,
but our cells recognize it.
>>LIU: Do you think,
Regina, that's
why people feel so much
better, differently,
in Europe or other
places outside of us
compared to the USA?
I've had a lot of
clients tell me that.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>LIU: I have felt
it as well, too.
>>REGINA: I have, too.
>>LIU: Yeah.
>>REGINA: When I go to
Europe, I feel refreshed,
even if I'm in a big city
and then come back into it.
>>LIU: Yeah.
>>REGINA: But in my case,
it's slightly different,
because I live in a fairly
isolated environment on a farm.
No 5G around, and really
not many neighbors.
And so it's a little more
peaceful than normal,
but I go out of that.
As soon as you're out of
it and in normal spectrum
or in a hotel, you can feel it.
>>LIU: Yeah, exactly.
>>REGINA: So I'm thinking
it's a combination.
As you say, these overt things
that we can choose to do
and that we have the
capacity as human beings
to do and share with one
another are fabulous.
But we do have this other
stuff passing through us
without our permission,
all the time.
>>LIU: Yes, that's right.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LIU: You're hitting it
without our permission.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LIU: Yeah.
>>REGINA: So there we go.
So oxytocin production.
OK, now I have another
little-- go ahead.
>>LIU: Oh, so just
to tack onto that.
There are studies that
show the EMF of 3G,
4G, or some of
the higher levels,
especially they also
alter our viruses.
They get unhappy and they're
under siege and they come out.
They're chronically activated.
Just like someone who gets
shingles from herpes virus,
the varicella, they're--
it's like a mini shingles,
but neurologically.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>LIU: Not even being seen.
So we see a lot of
chronically-activated
Epstein-Barr, cytomegalovirus,
HHV-6, 7, parvo, all of them.
And lyme co-infections, so--
>>REGINA: This is so important
for people to understand.
>>LIU: This is why the
goal is to hard and why
people get frustrated.
And then they get very
tired of trying to try
these random Google protocols.
They don't work for them.
They're not customized
and they're not really
getting to the root
issue of a lot of things
in a sequential, safe way.
>>REGINA: Right.
OK, so I'll go back where I was
going to hop a little bit ago,
seemingly tangential.
And that has to do
with the nasal passages
and kind of chronic nasal stuff
or low-grade nasal infections
and their affiliation
with the guts.
How does that work?
>>LIU: Yes.
So we do a full terrain
rehaul, overhaul.
Because every part of
our body is connected.
Just like on
Facebook or you and I
are three or six degrees away.
Everybody's connected, whether
they believe it or not.
And that's same with
all our organ systems.
They are all connected
through the lymph.
Yeah, so our lymph--
like for instance, breast
milk has fiber in it.
It's called human
milk oligosaccharides.
The baby gets it to
feed the bacteria there.
Well, our lymph
carries, guess what?
Poop bacteria up
into mom's breast
milk so that she can anchor an
immune system into the baby.
It's the probiotics in
her body, as well as
going through the birth canal.
The vaginal birth canal
is the amazing place
where babies get inoculated
with all their immune system,
the bacteria from mom.
So everything's connected.
And when we do protocols, we're
doing sinus rinses, throat.
Because as we're
sleeping, there's
always a little postnasal
drip, all night.
7% of our life, we
have low postnasal drip
or a little regurge
from our esophagus.
So we have to look
at that terrain,
because we don't want to do
all this overhaul in the gut
but then have every night a
little reinoculation again.
>>REGINA: Well, that's
what I'm wondering.
Is sinus rinsing a good idea
as a daily practice anyway?
>>LIU: Well, we have
some botanicals we use,
and they're very safe and great.
But you have to be
careful with water.
People think it's sterile.
No, it's not.
There actually can be some
small parasites or intracellular
parasites we want
to be careful about.
>>REGINA: So you want
really clean water.
>>LIU: Yeah, boiled.
>>REGINA: It has to pure water.
>>LIU: Yeah, absolutely.
>>REGINA: Yes, pure water.
And then what about saline
and saline and baking soda
or sodium bicarbonate?
>>LIU: I haven't
used that too much,
but we do more botanicals, so
we do like olive leaf extract
or grapefruit seed extract.
There's a variety of
nasal preps that we do.
Even xylitol.
It's a sugar, but then
also, it breaks biofilms
and it helps with MRSA, MARCoNS,
and biofilms and lyme biofilms.
So we start there.
And then we harbor different
pathogens in our mouth.
So again, we swallow or
have that postnasal drip,
particularly pathogenic
strep and fungal elements.
They may be in the mouth.
If people have pets,
sometimes we to work
on their pets a little bit.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LIU: [LAUGHS] Yeah.
>>REGINA: If you live
and sleep with pets.
>>LIU: Exactly.
>>REGINA: So some
whole other level.
Yeah, so--
>>LIU: Studies show we make
the same flora that they
have within us, and they
also have some of our flora
within them.
It's very funny and uncanny,
because we're all connected.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LIU: We share a
microbial cloud, right?
>>REGINA: Yeah, that's--
>>LIU: So we just work a
little bit, inch by inch.
And then for women, we also
have a vaginal protocol.
It's very important.
Because just like sinuses, it's
this huge, 3-dimensional space
where the babies live and
hibernate and incubate.
It's a huge area.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LIU: Yeah.
So what we'll see usually
within two months or less, women
with cysts or fibroids or
polycystic ovarian disease,
PCOS, they'll be
symptom free, no PMS
and no more aches, no pain,
endometriosis and discomfort
are gone.
And when they try to size a
cyst or fibroid with their OB,
within two or three months,
they can't even find it.
It's entirely gone, so
the body can melt it away
when we rehab these areas for
them and bring back the flora.
The flora help to
break it all down.
I'm so grateful for them.
>>REGINA: It's exciting, but
it's a commitment for people.
You have to at least be aware
and then stay with something.
I'm one of those
classic failures,
because I'll try something
for a week and well, that
didn't work and--
>>LIU: I'll try for one day.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LIU: I'm bad.
I'm worse than you.
[LAUGHTER]
Oh, my God.
It's not working.
>>REGINA: Well, maybe
I'm flattering myself.
Probably closer to
five days average.
I'll try for a
little bit and then
say, eh, I'm not feeling
anything, and let go.
But really, once you
strike on something
that has some traditionally
useful elements,
it's a good idea to stick
with it for a while, isn't it?
>>LIU: Yeah.
You can take some breaks.
It's OK, to see how the
body holds that resilience.
Yeah.
And then, the deeper the
dysbiosis usually, these things
don't happen overnight, right?
So then they're stuck
in there for a while.
It takes a little time to
kind of bring them out.
But they do.
People have unrelenting
genetics and resolve.
They can get through
so many things.
>>REGINA: Yeah, our bodies
are miraculous that way,
if we don't just feed it total
garbage and stress it out
all the time.
>>LIU: Exactly, yes.
>>REGINA: So let me ask you the
whole thing about consumption
of sugar.
And you said this earlier.
This is one of the
things that has to go,
because all these things
feed on it, right?
>>LIU: Yeah, I'm not the biggest
fan of the restricted diets.
That kind of gets people
into these weird--
>>REGINA: Well,
especially sugar.
>>LIU: Yeah.
>>REGINA: You remember,
we were talking about it
before we came on, the
movie "Elf," the main food
groups, sugar, maple syrup,
candy canes, and something
else.
>>LIU: Yeah.
>>REGINA: I thought, oh, that--
>>LIU: Gingerbread houses.
Yeah, who knows?
>>REGINA: Gingerbread houses.
[LAUGHTER]
>>LIU: OK, so I was looking at
a lot of centenarian studies,
and all of them, they had
great high-fiber diets.
Maybe 30, even 50 grams
of fiber every day
and dirt probiotics from their
gardens and being outdoors
and just living off the land.
Nothing was cleaned or sterile.
They lived off the land.
There wasn't-- in some places,
no toilets or running water,
even.
So these centenarians
are fascinating.
To me, they also did have
ceremonies and even festivals
and had some sugar
and they were fine.
They were totally fine.
So I think when we're
healthy, when we have
good bacteria, particularly--
I like the photobacteria.
So when I formulate probiotics,
I always have a lot in there,
and it's the highest strength
in the market, actually,
in our industry.
Bifidobacteria that are
good, that eat fiber,
they create food.
They're so generous.
They're so kind.
They create food on
their outside cell wall
to feed other flora
to eat during meals.
>>REGINA: Oh, interesting.
>>LIU: Yeah.
And they take--
you know what they?
Take they take sugar.
They take monosaccharides,
which is sugar,
and disaccharides,
which is sugar.
These food groups that get
clipped off of complex carbs.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LIU: Yeah, even our beans,
lentils, and complex carbs
in starchy tubers.
They can break them down.
Or our enzymes start
working on them
and then the bacteria
break them down.
And then they clip off
these little special foods
and can consolidate them
for the rest of the hive.
But if we're missing them, then
people will get a fatty liver.
They get liver
fibrosis of the organs.
They get calcifications.
Because when they're not
around, then now the sugar
is being used by pathogenic
flora and yeast and Candida,
so--
>>REGINA: So you're
a big fan of Bifidus?
>>LIU: I sure am, yes.
>>REGINA: OK, that's good.
>>LIU: Yes.
>>REGINA: We've got one--
>>LIU: More particularly,
Bifidobacterium longum,
which is seen in
centenarians at high numbers.
>>REGINA: Oh, yes.
>>LIU: That's a
very special one.
It's in babies and all the way
up through our whole lifespan.
>>REGINA: Longum, right.
>>LIU: Yeah, and
it's also associated
with reducing-- helping
calm, increasing
feelings of wellness, and
it's an antidepressant
in human trials.
Those test like kids in
college or med students,
because they're
all stressed out.
[LAUGHS]
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LIU: And they give them these
probiotics and it's like, whoa.
They score much higher
on the Ham Depression
scores and other scores.
It's incredible.
>>REGINA: That's.
Cool OK, let's-- we're still
on the subject of sugars,
so let's go to the other
sugars, the ethanol sugars
and so forth.
Monk fruit and all that.
>>LIU: OK, yeah.
>>REGINA: Now, what's the
deal with those in our body?
>>LIU: So sugar alcohols,
we sense them as sweet
and they're--
but we don't get too many
calories usually from them,
right?
Like xylitol and all the
sugar alcohols, manitol--
>>REGINA: Monk fruit--
>>LIU: And monk, yes.
>>REGINA: --and red
fruital and so forth.
>>LIU: Yes, and--
stevia is an herb,
so it's not really
a sugar alcohol.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LIU: But it comes from an
herb for the sweet flavor.
>>REGINA: How are they for
our guts, the sugar alcohols?
>>LIU: So for our gut,
sometimes they're prebiotic.
They're fiber to
feed certain flora.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I've read that.
>>LIU: Yeah, so
they're a little better
than the artificial
sweeteners, which are all
shown to be antimicrobial
and terrible
and raise pathogens in the gut.
And related, actually, to more
metabolic syndrome, obesity,
and diabetes, believe it or not.
All those diet sodas.
>>REGINA: We don't want those.
>>LIU: Yeah.
So I believe in balance.
We didn't quite evolve with
the sugar alcohols around.
[LAUGHS]
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm, right.
That's what I'm
thinking about, is
this is new technology,
relatively speaking.
>>LIU: Yeah, new technology.
>>REGINA: And you
introduce a lot of it
into the body at one time, like
do a one-for-one replacement
if you're going
to make something
with ethanol sugars
for sugar, our body is
accustomed to old-fashioned
organic cane sugar or honey.
>>LIU: Yeah.
>>REGINA: I've wondered about
that, because a lot of people
actually have somewhat of
an adverse response to it.
>>LIU: Yeah.
They may have a FODMAP allergy,
but that's because they're--
when studies drill down, they
have pathogens and yeasts
in the gut and they're missing
the Bifido longum and other
consortia, their friends.
>>REGINA: I see.
>>LIU: Yeah.
>>REGINA: So if you had
that in place, it might be--
it's not as difficult or
challenging for the body
to do the ethanol sugars?
>>LIU: Yeah, we'll see them
recover that tolerance.
But I'm like you.
I'm a fan of Weston A. Price.
He was a big
anthropologist and dentist,
and he studied different
groups and civilizations
across the world.
And sugars immediately
cause the palate to change.
And even their bone structures
got wonky and a lot of cavities
and of course, skeletal
structure problems.
They were having gut dysbiosis.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>LIU: So when we see
people get healthier and eat
the right fiber, with or
without sugar alcohols, more
fiber and the right
probiotics, we
see people become like
vampires, "Twilight" vampires.
Their cheekbones pop out,
great skin, symmetry finally
in their face, and glowing
and healthy and high
fecundity, high fertility.
That's what we're into.
So sugar alcohols,
sometimes they're
a good crutch when people
are weaning off of sugar.
They say it's as
strong as cocaine,
so I'm not into cold
withdrawal for people.
I'm still kind of
a fan for caffeine
unless someone's
adrenals are poopy poopy
and we can't get
their cortisol fixed.
We're like, oh, OK.
Maybe just half a cup.
We negotiate that.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LIU: Yeah, so
the sugar alcohols,
sometimes they're a
little bridge until they--
when people wean off
and they feel healthy
and they have lots of fiber,
they don't crave things.
We hear within two months or
three months, oh, my gosh.
I'm sitting in the car.
I'm not depressed anymore, and
I don't crave sugar or alcohol
or drugs or marijuana or--
not that any of these are bad.
They're good crutches for
self-medication and soothing
and raise GABA.
But we want to do it naturally.
Our flora can help us do that.
They make these
neurotransmitters
for us, actually,
believe or not,
and they get all stored in
the enteric nervous system.
>>REGINA: OK.
Let's go to a few other things.
Ancient grains and
purple potatoes.
We're going to talk about a few
things that can be really good.
Your body--
>>LIU: Yeah, these are
all ancestral foods that
come from all around the world.
So you might want to look
at your own ethnicity
and see where your kind had
great diets, ancestral diets.
And it could be millet
or steel-cut oats.
And for others, it's like a
wide rainbow color of starches,
like purple tubers,
purple rice or red rice.
It's great to get whole,
diverse, different colors,
especially if you
know your ancestry
to go back and see what foods
they really ate a lot of,
or what produce and vegetables.
And mimic that a little bit.
You'll find that
those pro-anthocyanins
and antioxidants, they
may jive with your DNA
at an epigenetic
level that's even
more super epic than
just normal Whole Foods,
whatever, selections.
I love Whole Foods.
Don't get me wrong.
But we can kind of dial it in
if you get curious, I think.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
I hear what you're saying.
Now, one of the
things you said--
because the way some
people have done it,
they've been very successful
with the paleo diet, which
is primarily vegetables
with also fats and proteins.
Animal proteins included.
There are paleo diets that
are vegetarian as well.
>>LIU: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: So but paleo
basically cuts down
on a lot of the carbs.
And so this is
something you said.
When I was reading, you
said, "The paleo diet
is insufficient, though."
And I wanted to ask
what that means.
>>LIU: So although I'm a huge--
I'm the hugest
fan of paleo diet.
It really helped me
to ramp my health up
after my various health crises
and become a really great
athlete, a pseudo-athlete.
[LAUGHS]
But for some genetics, I
found that the paleo diet
without grains, sans grains,
a major starch group,
relying only on tubers.
Tubers are OK in paleo
diet, generally speaking.
Certain genetics are actually
adapted to the Agricultural
Age.
So we had genetic evolution,
maybe 10,000, 20,000 years ago
when the agricultural
domestication revolution
occurred.
And for me, for
instance, I have alleles.
I have APOE2 and E3.
>>REGINA: So what's that mean?
>>LIU: So these are
alleles that help identify
how ancient our kind is, or
even you can go with blood types
as well.
And APOE2 is believed to be
probably agriculture-adapted.
And I'm Asian, you know.
And when I took rice out of
my diet during the paleo diet,
and I was doing a lot of
exercise, endurance exercise,
in fact, half marathons
and triathlons,
I actually had some of the
worst health in my life.
I just was not
having the carbing
up enough to fuel and create
glycogen for the muscles
that I needed.
I couldn't refill
them to the level.
You need 400 grams
in your muscles
and then 200 grams elsewhere.
And I just could not do that
for my races and training.
So I think for some people, it
may be really a great healing
diet.
And then looking at genetics,
if they're more northern and not
equatorial, they're
probably more
adapted for the true
Paleolithic diet.
But I'm an equatorial
evolutionary product,
and my kind likely ate a lot
of fruits, a lot of carbs,
less so--
probably a lot of
protein, but not
to the degree as the
Northerners, Northern Europe
and--
>>REGINA: So you're saying
like Northern Europeans,
for example?
>>LIU: Yeah, or
Mongolians and-- yeah.
>>REGINA: They do really
well on paleo in general?
>>LIU: I seem to see so, yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LIU: But they also do tubers,
and that jives well with them.
>>REGINA: That's right.
>>LIU: Yams and sweet potatoes.
>>REGINA: Yeah, potatoes.
Lots of potatoes.
>>LIU: A lot of potatoes.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah.
>>LIU: And potatoes are--
when we have plenty of acid
in the gut, hydrochloric acid
in the gut, we can
achieve more health
when we achieve a pH of 1
or 2, believe it or not,
in the stomach.
And this fries all the
pathogens, COVID, pneumonia,
everything, streps, fungi.
>>REGINA: But you're saying
potato eating does that?
>>LIU: Then when we add
acid to cook potatoes,
it becomes instantly
a form of fiber.
We get no-- almost very low
amniotic glycemic index.
>>REGINA: And like
you say, it's really
good if we go with the
colored potatoes, ideally.
>>LIU: Yes.
>>REGINA: The sweet potatoes,
purple potatoes, and so forth
even better than the
standard white potatoes.
>>LIU: We're more ancestral,
like smaller Yukon or--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LIU: Not necessarily the--
>>REGINA: Yeah,
that's what we grow.
>>LIU: The spud-inhibiting,
chemical-covered, big Idaho.
>>REGINA: So wanted
to get to that one,
because a lot of people
would be thinking that.
And that's when I felt my best,
was on a pretty classic paleo
diet.
Yeah.
>>LIU: And your ancestry
is Northern European?
>>REGINA: Northern European.
>>LIU: Yeah, that makes sense.
A lot--
>>REGINA: Scottish,
Irish, English, German.
>>LIU: Yeah, and you're
very light-skinned,
so you need sunlight.
But if you OD on it, you
can burn yourself, too,
and create cancerous--
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LIU: Unless you have
the good reserves.
>>REGINA: No, I have olive skin.
>>LIU: Oh, so--
>>REGINA: Oddly,
no one else does.
No one knows who had sex
with someone special.
>>LIU: You might be
part Italian and--
yeah.
>>REGINA: Don't know.
It just doesn't
show up genetically,
but my son and I look like this.
>>LIU: So you've got the
best of both sides, yes.
>>REGINA: But basically,
our-- yeah, our family's
Northern European.
And they all do well when
they do more of a paleo diet.
Everyone feels better.
Brain fog goes
away, lose weight.
So for that group, and
you say Mongolian as well,
northern climes
around the world.
>>LIU: Yes.
And if you look at
that, that may be E4.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
>>LIU: And E4 is one of the
smartest carriers of it.
Unfortunately, they're also
associated with more type 3
diabetes, type 2
diabetes, Alzheimer's.
But that's because
if they overdose
on sugar and modern carbs,
refined simple carbs, not so
great for them or
their gut flora.
>>REGINA: Right, right.
OK.
Well, we've gotten
through the detection,
the tests, the proper tests.
>>LIU: Mm-hmm.
>>REGINA: You've given us
some wonderful information
about various types of
supplements that we can take.
We've talked about the
foods and the problems
in our society that's
turning the flame down
and is really
allowing overgrowth
of these not-so-beneficial
bacteria and fungus,
SIBO, SIFO, and so forth.
Some of the foods that we can
eat, love, touching, oxytocin.
Like you said, a diet
that's right for our type
in terms of geographically,
our historical type.
Tell us what else--
in wrapping this up, tell
us some other final--
>>LIU: Yeah, there are a couple
of things people should just
start doing now.
Look at probiotics.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>LIU: I'm a fan of all of,
them and we have Bifido maximus
on our website.
Second, some people
who are struggling,
they probably aren't having
as much acid in their stomach.
So we can mimic that a little
bit, unless they're allergic--
>>REGINA: Would you do HCG--
>>LIU: Yes, exactly.
>>REGINA: --as hydrochloric
acid drops or--
>>LIU: No, more naturals
are probably OK.
Like lemon juice in
their water with meals.
>>REGINA: Oh, that's good.
>>LIU: Preferably warm
water, because then you're
warming up the belly,
warming up all the enzymes
to be more active.
Every degree we lose, we're
losing activity, like epic.
Like 1,500% of our activities.
>>REGINA: So just the habit
of having lemon in water.
>>LIU: Right, or ACV,
apple cider vinegar.
There is some
histamines in there.
Some people may be
histamine intolerant,
so you want to go with maybe
more lemon, if that's OK.
And then third is walking,
more low exercise.
Nothing too extreme.
I'm not talking
marathons every day.
But like 10,000.
If you're trying to lose
weight, 20,000 steps a day.
Maybe evolutionarily,
we're used to that.
And same with our gut.
Our gut flora may like that
churning and the heat generated
and all the fun
that goes with that.
>>REGINA: Just the
heat alone seems
as though it would be
worth it just to get
the fire stoked a little bit.
>>LIU: Exactly, exactly.
>>REGINA: It's all
very practical.
It's all very complex.
It's all highly individual.
But it can all be done.
>>LIU: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: Well, OK.
So thank you so much for
taking the time to be with us.
My brain is kind of
on fire, overwhelmed
with information in a good way.
You've given us a lot
of tools to work with.
There's some really
basic principles
to work with, which
I super appreciate.
And I know our
audience does, too.
>>LIU: Oh, I'm so grateful.
I love educating and
entertaining a little.
[LAUGHTER]
>>REGINA: You're wonderful.
Thank you, Grace.
>>LIU: Thank you so much.
>>REGINA: Again, the
name of Dr. Grace's book
is "7 steps to Heal SIBO," and
you can also visit her website
at thegutinstitute.com.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[MUSIC PLAYING]